---
title: Brick Introduction 
date: 2024-06-01 11:06:00  -500
description: Introduction of bricks. 
categories: [Building_material, technical_subjects]
tags: [building_material]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

# Brick

#### Size of brick 
* **Standard Size**: 19x9x9 cm.
* **Modular size**: ***same as standard size*** 19x9x9 cm.
* **Nominal size**: (***It is the size of brick with mortor***) 20x10x10 cm.
* **Traditional/ Conventinal size of brick**: 9x4.5x3 inches.

#### Weight of brick. 
* Weight of brick: **3 kg to 3.5 kg**

#### Ingredients of brick work 
***It the ingredients of soil by which brick is made. The trick to remmember it is `SALIMA`***
* **Silica** -> 50% to 60%.
* **Alumina** -> 20% to 30%.
* **Lime** -> 4% to 5%.
* **Iron Oxide** -> 5% to 6%.
* **Magnesia** -> 1%.
* **Alkalies** -> 1%
**NOTE: The total amount of clay and silt should be less than 50%**

#### Functions of ingredients of Brick earth 

1. **Silica (50% to 60%)** :-
    -> It provides **Strength** and **Durability** to the brick.
    -> It reduces the **shrinkage** of the brick.
    -> It keeps the **edges** of the brick **sharp**.
    -> It **stops warping**
    **Excessive amount of silica _(over 50 to 60%)_ will make brick brittle and weak, due to the loss of cohession (cohession is the property of of some elemenet to form a bond)**

2. **Alumina (20% to 30%)** :-
    -> It provides **plasticity** to the brick.
    -> It is the main component of the brick. 
    **Excessive amount of Alumina _(over 20% to 30%)_ : The edges of the brick won't be sharp in the edges and corners. And the shrinkage will increase due to which cracks will be generated in the brick**

3. **Lime (4% to 5%)** :-
    -> The lime shouldn't be in **lump form**. It should be in **Powder form** always.
    -> It reduces **shrinkage** in the brick.
    -> It works as a **flux**.
    **Excessive amount of Lime _(over 4% t0 5%)_ : It can over burn the brick.**

4. **Iron oxide (5% to 6%)** :-
    -> It **provides** the **red colour** to the brick.
    -> It make brick **impermeable**.
    -> It gives **Hardness** to the brick.
    **Excessive amount of Iron Oxide _(over 5% to 6%)_, It makes the brick blackish or dark blue**

5. **Magnesia (1%)**
    -> It gives **yellow colour** to the brick.
    -> It reduces **shrinkage** in the brick.
    **Excessive amount of Magnesia _(over 1%)_, makes the brick yellwish and the decay of the brick will start**

6. **Alkalies (1%)** :-
    -> It shouldn't be present. It cause **efflorosence**.


#### Harmful substances in Brick earth. 
1. **Organic matter** :-
    -> It includes things like _plants leaves and roots_ and while burning of brick the leave the gap.
    -> It makes the moulding of the brick harder. 

2. **Lump lime** :-
   -> When burning of the brick it will form **CaO (Calicium oxide)**. CaO reacts with **water (H2O)** and it volume increases 2 to 2.5 times which can cause **cracks** in the brick. 

3. **Alkalies** :-
    -> The cause **efflorosence** in the brick.

4. **Pebbles and gravels** :-
    -> Due to them proper mixing and moulding won't happen.

5. **Carbonaceous material** :-
    -> It cause **black core defect** in the brick.

6. **Sulphur** :-
    -> In the presences of sulphur extra **spongy swallen mass** will collect on the surface of the brick. 

